README.md, before:

# pyguide

[![CI](https://github.com/bgreenwell/pyguide/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/bgreenwell/pyguide/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Ruff](https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/ruff/main/assets/badge/v2.json)](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff)
[![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/pyguide.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/pyguide/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

> **Disclaimer:** `pyguide` is currently a **work in progress** and is not yet production-ready. The current implementation is written in pure Python/NumPy for clarity and algorithm verification. Future versions will identify performance bottlenecks and replace them with optimized, compiled code (Rust or C).

A high-quality, scikit-learn compatible Python implementation of the **GUIDE** (Generalized, Unbiased, Interaction Detection and Estimation) algorithm.

## Why GUIDE?

Standard decision tree implementations (like CART or scikit-learn's `DecisionTreeClassifier`) suffer from **variable selection bias**: they tend to favor features with many unique values (high cardinality), even if they are noise. They also often fail to detect complex feature interactions unless they are deep.

`pyguide` fills this gap by:
- **Unbiased Selection:** Separating variable selection from split optimization using Chi-square tests.
- **Built-in Interaction Detection:** Explicitly searching for multi-variable interactions (pairs, triplets, etc.).
- **Scikit-learn Compatibility:** Full parity with the scikit-learn estimator API, including structural attributes (`n_leaves_`, `max_depth_`) and diagnostic methods (`apply`, `decision_path`).

## Key Features

- **Unbiased Variable Selection:** Prevents bias towards high-cardinality features.
- **Strict GUIDE Importance:** Implementation of Loh & Zhou (2021) unbiased importance scores with bias correction.
- **Tree Ensembles:** Random Forest implementation using GUIDE trees for improved accuracy and robustness.
- **Advanced Interaction Detection:** Configure `interaction_depth` to find complex relationships.
- **Scalable Search:** Use `max_interaction_candidates` to speed up training on high-dimensional data by orders of magnitude.
- **Handling Missing Values:** Native support for NaNs using impurity-based routing.
- **Pruning:** Minimal Cost-Complexity Pruning support via `ccp_alpha`.
- **Visualization:** Integrated with scikit-learn's `plot_tree` for easy interpretation.

## Installation

```bash
pip install pyguide  # Note: Replace with actual install command when published
```

## Quick Start

### Classification (Random Forest)

```python
from pyguide import GuideRandomForestClassifier
from sklearn.datasets import load_digits
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split

X, y = load_digits(return_X_y=True)
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, random_state=42)

clf = GuideRandomForestClassifier(n_estimators=100, max_features="sqrt")
clf.fit(X_train, y_train)

print(f"Accuracy: {clf.score(X_test, y_test):.4f}")
```

### Classification (Single Tree)

```python
from pyguide import GuideTreeClassifier
from sklearn.datasets import load_iris
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split

X, y = load_iris(return_X_y=True)
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, random_state=42)

clf = GuideTreeClassifier(max_depth=3, interaction_depth=1)
clf.fit(X_train, y_train)

print(f"Accuracy: {clf.score(X_test, y_test):.4f}")
print(f"Number of leaves: {clf.n_leaves_}")
```

### Strict Variable Importance

```python
from pyguide import GuideTreeClassifier
from sklearn.datasets import load_iris

X, y = load_iris(return_X_y=True)

# Calculate unbiased importance scores (Loh & Zhou, 2021)
clf = GuideTreeClassifier(interaction_depth=1)
scores = clf.compute_guide_importance(X, y, bias_correction=True)

# scores[i] > 1.0 indicates importance greater than noise
print("Feature Importances:", scores)
```

### Regression

```python
from pyguide import GuideTreeRegressor
import numpy as np

# XOR-like interaction problem
X = np.random.rand(500, 2)
y = (X[:, 0] > 0.5) ^ (X[:, 1] > 0.5)
y = y.astype(float) + np.random.normal(0, 0.1, 500)

reg = GuideTreeRegressor(max_depth=2, interaction_depth=1)
reg.fit(X, y)

print(f"R2 Score: {reg.score(X, y):.4f}")
```

## Advanced Usage

### Scalable Interaction Search

For data sets with hundreds or thousands of features, exhaustive interaction search is slow. Use `max_interaction_candidates` to restrict the search to the most promising features:

```python
clf = GuideTreeClassifier(
    interaction_depth=1,
    max_interaction_candidates=10,  # Only test interactions among top 10 features
    significance_threshold=0.05
)
```

### Visualization

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from pyguide.visualization import plot_guide_tree

clf.fit(X, y)
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 8))
plot_guide_tree(clf, feature_names=iris.feature_names)
plt.show()
```

## Benchmarks

Some (very) preliminary benchmarks are shown below:

```bash
uv run python benchmarks/main_benchmark.py
```

--- Benchmarking Classifier: Iris (150 samples, 4 features) ---
| Model                   |   Train Time (s) |   Test Time (s) |   Accuracy |
|:------------------------|-----------------:|----------------:|-----------:|
| sklearn (CART)          |           0.0005 |          0.0002 |     1.0000 |
| pyguide (GUIDE)         |           0.0037 |          0.0002 |     1.0000 |
| sklearn (Random Forest) |           0.0065 |          0.0005 |     1.0000 |
| pyguide (Random Forest) |           0.0485 |          0.0012 |     1.0000 |

--- Benchmarking Classifier: Digits (1797 samples, 64 features) ---
| Model                   |   Train Time (s) |   Test Time (s) |   Accuracy |
|:------------------------|-----------------:|----------------:|-----------:|
| sklearn (CART)          |           0.0052 |          0.0002 |     0.6639 |
| pyguide (GUIDE)         |           0.1143 |          0.0009 |     0.7083 |
| sklearn (Random Forest) |           0.0161 |          0.0007 |     0.9389 |
| pyguide (Random Forest) |           0.4842 |          0.0164 |     0.9250 |

--- Benchmarking Regressor: Diabetes (442 samples, 10 features) ---
| Model                   |   Train Time (s) |   Test Time (s) |   R2 Score |
|:------------------------|-----------------:|----------------:|-----------:|
| sklearn (CART)          |           0.0007 |          0.0002 |     0.3345 |
| pyguide (GUIDE)         |           0.0154 |          0.0003 |     0.3144 |
| sklearn (Random Forest) |           0.0107 |          0.0006 |     0.4294 |
| pyguide (Random Forest) |           0.9531 |          0.0040 |     0.4688 |


## References

- Loh, W.-Y. (2002). *Regression trees with unbiased variable selection and interaction detection*. Statistica Sinica, 361-386.
- Loh, W.-Y. (2009). *Improving the precision of classification trees*. Annals of Applied Statistics, 3(4), 1710-1737.
- Loh, W.-Y. and Zhou, P. (2021). *Variable Importance Scores*. Journal of Data Science, 19(4), 569-592.

## Roadmap

- [x] **Tree Ensembles:** Random Forest wrappers using GUIDE as the base learner.
- [x] **Variable Importance Mode:** Enhanced diagnostics and standalone importance scores (Strict GUIDE).
- [ ] **Gradient Boosting:** Boosting wrappers using GUIDE as the base learner.
- [ ] **Performance Optimization:** Porting core splitting and selection logic to Rust/C for production-scale performance.
- [ ] **Extended Interaction Support:** Automated search for arbitrary-depth interactions with better pruning.

Commit message:

docs: update README with rust build instructions and finalized roadmap

README.md, after:

# pyguide

[![CI](https://github.com/bgreenwell/pyguide/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/bgreenwell/pyguide/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Ruff](https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/ruff/main/assets/badge/v2.json)](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff)
[![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/pyguide.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/pyguide/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

A high-quality, scikit-learn compatible Python implementation of the **GUIDE** (Generalized, Unbiased, Interaction Detection and Estimation) algorithm.

## Why GUIDE?

Standard decision tree implementations (like CART or scikit-learn's `DecisionTreeClassifier`) suffer from **variable selection bias**: they tend to favor features with many unique values (high cardinality), even if they are noise. They also often fail to detect complex feature interactions unless they are deep.

`pyguide` fills this gap by:
- **Unbiased Selection:** Separating variable selection from split optimization using Chi-square tests.
- **Built-in Interaction Detection:** Explicitly searching for multi-variable interactions (pairs, triplets, etc.).
- **Scikit-learn Compatibility:** Full parity with the scikit-learn estimator API, including structural attributes (`n_leaves_`, `max_depth_`) and diagnostic methods (`apply`, `decision_path`).
- **High Performance:** Core algorithms are implemented in Rust for speed and efficiency.

## Key Features

- **Unbiased Variable Selection:** Prevents bias towards high-cardinality features.
- **Strict GUIDE Importance:** Implementation of Loh & Zhou (2021) unbiased importance scores with bias correction.
- **Tree Ensembles:** Random Forest implementation using GUIDE trees for improved accuracy and robustness.
- **Advanced Interaction Detection:** Configure `interaction_depth` to find complex relationships.
- **Scalable Search:** Use `max_interaction_candidates` to speed up training on high-dimensional data by orders of magnitude.
- **Handling Missing Values:** Native support for NaNs using impurity-based routing.
- **Pruning:** Minimal Cost-Complexity Pruning support via `ccp_alpha`.
- **Visualization:** Integrated with scikit-learn's `plot_tree` for easy interpretation.

## Installation

```bash
pip install pyguide  # Note: Replace with actual install command when published
```

### Building from Source

To build from source, you will need the Rust toolchain installed (e.g., via `rustup`).

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/bgreenwell/pyguide.git
cd pyguide

# Install maturin
pip install maturin

# Build and install
maturin develop --release
```

## Quick Start

### Classification (Random Forest)

```python
from pyguide import GuideRandomForestClassifier
from sklearn.datasets import load_digits
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split

X, y = load_digits(return_X_y=True)
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, random_state=42)

clf = GuideRandomForestClassifier(n_estimators=100, max_features="sqrt")
clf.fit(X_train, y_train)

print(f"Accuracy: {clf.score(X_test, y_test):.4f}")
```

### Classification (Single Tree)

```python
from pyguide import GuideTreeClassifier
from sklearn.datasets import load_iris
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split

X, y = load_iris(return_X_y=True)
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, random_state=42)

clf = GuideTreeClassifier(max_depth=3, interaction_depth=1)
clf.fit(X_train, y_train)

print(f"Accuracy: {clf.score(X_test, y_test):.4f}")
print(f"Number of leaves: {clf.n_leaves_}")
```

### Strict Variable Importance

```python
from pyguide import GuideTreeClassifier
from sklearn.datasets import load_iris

X, y = load_iris(return_X_y=True)

# Calculate unbiased importance scores (Loh & Zhou, 2021)
clf = GuideTreeClassifier(interaction_depth=1)
scores = clf.compute_guide_importance(X, y, bias_correction=True)

# scores[i] > 1.0 indicates importance greater than noise
print("Feature Importances:", scores)
```

### Regression

```python
from pyguide import GuideTreeRegressor
import numpy as np

# XOR-like interaction problem
X = np.random.rand(500, 2)
y = (X[:, 0] > 0.5) ^ (X[:, 1] > 0.5)
y = y.astype(float) + np.random.normal(0, 0.1, 500)

reg = GuideTreeRegressor(max_depth=2, interaction_depth=1)
reg.fit(X, y)

print(f"R2 Score: {reg.score(X, y):.4f}")
```

## Advanced Usage

### Scalable Interaction Search

For data sets with hundreds or thousands of features, exhaustive interaction search is slow. Use `max_interaction_candidates` to restrict the search to the most promising features:

```python
clf = GuideTreeClassifier(
    interaction_depth=1,
    max_interaction_candidates=10,  # Only test interactions among top 10 features
    significance_threshold=0.05
)
```

### Visualization

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from pyguide.visualization import plot_guide_tree

clf.fit(X, y)
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 8))
plot_guide_tree(clf, feature_names=iris.feature_names)
plt.show()
```

## Benchmarks

Some (very) preliminary benchmarks are shown below:

```bash
uv run python benchmarks/main_benchmark.py
```

--- Benchmarking Classifier: Iris (150 samples, 4 features) ---
| Model                   |   Train Time (s) |   Test Time (s) |   Accuracy |
|:------------------------|-----------------:|----------------:|-----------:|
| sklearn (CART)          |           0.0005 |          0.0002 |     1.0000 |
| pyguide (GUIDE)         |           0.0037 |          0.0002 |     1.0000 |
| sklearn (Random Forest) |           0.0065 |          0.0005 |     1.0000 |
| pyguide (Random Forest) |           0.0485 |          0.0012 |     1.0000 |

--- Benchmarking Classifier: Digits (1797 samples, 64 features) ---
| Model                   |   Train Time (s) |   Test Time (s) |   Accuracy |
|:------------------------|-----------------:|----------------:|-----------:|
| sklearn (CART)          |           0.0052 |          0.0002 |     0.6639 |
| pyguide (GUIDE)         |           0.1143 |          0.0009 |     0.7083 |
| sklearn (Random Forest) |           0.0161 |          0.0007 |     0.9389 |
| pyguide (Random Forest) |           0.4842 |          0.0164 |     0.9250 |

--- Benchmarking Regressor: Diabetes (442 samples, 10 features) ---
| Model                   |   Train Time (s) |   Test Time (s) |   R2 Score |
|:------------------------|-----------------:|----------------:|-----------:|
| sklearn (CART)          |           0.0007 |          0.0002 |     0.3345 |
| pyguide (GUIDE)         |           0.0154 |          0.0003 |     0.3144 |
| sklearn (Random Forest) |           0.0107 |          0.0006 |     0.4294 |
| pyguide (Random Forest) |           0.9531 |          0.0040 |     0.4688 |


## References

- Loh, W.-Y. (2002). *Regression trees with unbiased variable selection and interaction detection*. Statistica Sinica, 361-386.
- Loh, W.-Y. (2009). *Improving the precision of classification trees*. Annals of Applied Statistics, 3(4), 1710-1737.
- Loh, W.-Y. and Zhou, P. (2021). *Variable Importance Scores*. Journal of Data Science, 19(4), 569-592.

## Roadmap

- [x] **Tree Ensembles:** Random Forest wrappers using GUIDE as the base learner.
- [x] **Variable Importance Mode:** Enhanced diagnostics and standalone importance scores (Strict GUIDE).
- [ ] **Gradient Boosting:** Boosting wrappers using GUIDE as the base learner.
- [x] **Performance Optimization:** Porting core splitting and selection logic to Rust/C for production-scale performance.
- [ ] **Extended Interaction Support:** Automated search for arbitrary-depth interactions with better pruning.
